HOME
Learn about your kitties. Contribute to research. Help shelter kitties. 
Join the Project / Watch the Video
As seen in: Popular Science, Wired and LiveScience 

MISSION

We love cats. We are studying how microbes interact with cat biology, behavior and health. We invite YOU and your CAT to join our study on the microbiome and biology of cats that also include cats living in shelters and wild cats. An important part of the research we're doing requires the help of animal care organizations. At least 10% of the funds we raise on Kickstarter will be paid to the organizations that are helping us. We love science. Latest technologies. We are using the latest DNA sequencing methods to characterize the microbial diversity in cats. Big data. With your help, we will create the largest database of microbiome data and other data (behavior, health, diet, breed, geography) on cats. Open science. We are committed to open science. While protecting your privacy, we will openly share the results of this study with you. And we will share the database with other researchers who are developing new methods and applications. We will publish our findings in open access journals that everyone can read. We value diversity. Cats. We are launching the largest study of the microbiome of kitties. By looking at all kinds of kitties, from big to small, house cats and wild cats, cats spanning a wide range of health conditions and personalities, we will begin to understand how kitties differ and what makes for happy kitties. People. We are committed to including all kinds of people in science. We believe in citizen science and invite everyone who cares about kitties to join this project. Microbes. A healthy gut microbiome contains a diversity of microbes. Your support can help make kittybiome happen.
JOIN THE PROJECT

PROCESS
 Intake We'll start by sending you a sample intake kit. This will be a convenient way for you to collect a small fecal sample from your lovely cat. You will deposit this sample in a sample collection tube and mail it to our sample intake center. There, the sample will be processed with other samples, preparing the input samples to be sequenced (i.e. for the DNA to be read). The result of this process ("library preparation") is a DNA sequencing "library". Sequencing After preparing the sequencing libraries, we will perform ultra-high-throughput microbial community analysis using the Illumina MiSeq platform. Bacterial taxa present in the samples will be identified by sequencing the V4 hypervariable region of 16S rRNA. Sequencing will be performed with minor modifications following the protocols of the Earth Microbiome Project. DNA will be extracted from samples using the MoBio PowerFecal Kit (Carlsbad, CA) with bead beating. DNA concentrations will be standardized across all samples for PCR enrichment and library preparation. After verifying amplification, amplicons will be cleaned with magnetic beads and quantified using a Qubit Fluorometer (Invitrogen, NY), and pooled in equimolar concentrations for sequencing. The resulting libraries will be sequenced in one Illumina MiSeq lane (paired-end 250 base pair sequencing) according to standard protocols. Analysis Bacterial species will be identified using the Quantitative Insights in Microbial Ecology (QIIME) and Mothur. We will assess differences in microbiome diversity using various nonparametric multivariate methods in R. Results will be presented in an interactive website that we are developing for this project.
JOIN THE PROJECT

TEAM
Holly Ganz, Ph.D.
 Holly is a project scientist at the UC Davis Genome Center. She is chiefly responsible for our scientific inquiry. She is your primary point of contact for press inquiries. On Twitter @hollyhganz. READ MORE 
Alexandra Martin, Intern VP of Exceptional   Alexandra is a student at UC Berkeley and works with us as a part of theBerkeley Animal Care Services (BACS). 
Jonathan Eisen, Ph.D.  World-renowned evolutionary biologist and cat enthusiast. Professor/P.I. at UC Davis. On Twitter @phylogenomics and his blog. READ MORE Jack Gilbert, Ph.D.  P.I. at Argonne National Laboratory and Co-Founder of the Earth Microbiome Project. On Twitter @gilbertjacka. READ MORE Jennifer Gardy, Ph.D.  Leader, Molecular Epidemiology at the BC Center for Disease Control. On Twitter @jennifergardy and on a website. READ MORE Collaborators Adrian Tordiffe, DVM  Senior Lecturer, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria, South Africa. On Twitter @AdrianTordiffe. Stan Marks, BVSc, Ph.D.  Professor of Small Animal Medicine at the UC Davis School of Veterinary Medicine. His research focuses on the role of enteropathogenic bacteria in diarrhea and modulation of intestinal microbiota in health and disease. More information.

